[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Welcome back to "Break
Through Emotional Eating."
I'm Gay Hendricks.
In this episode,
we're going to discuss
a topic of great importance--
emotional awareness.
I've often thought
that we should
start learning the skills
of emotional awareness
in kindergarten and
the first grade.
However, I know I didn't.
I didn't get any
training in those skills
in high school or
even college either.
It wasn't until
my doctor's degree
when it was almost
over that we started
working on the emotional
structure of human beings.
As I began my process of
losing 100-plus pounds,
I realized I needed to learn
how to embrace my emotions.
I needed to let down that
300-pound wall of defense
and build up a new
emotional awareness in me.
To help me better
understand your emotions,
here's a list of typical
physical reactions associated
with different emotions.
Fear is usually felt in the
body as a racy, slightly queasy
sensation, located
between the bottom
of your sternum and your navel.
It's in the same area as
the sensation of hunger.
Fear can range from
butterflies to heart pounding.
Since humans feel fear in the
same general region as hunger,
people often associate
that feeling with hunger.
This leads us to eat when we're
scared, rather than eating just
when we're hungry.
Sadness is usually experienced
as a pressure or heaviness
in your upper chest and throat.
Think of that lump
in the throat.
And this sensation appears
usually before tears come.
Joy is a bubbly
sense of lightness
at the center of your body.
With anger, the first
thing people notice
is a pulling contraction in
their upper neck and shoulders.
That's the early warning
signal that you're
getting angry about something.
This sensation appears
before secondary sensations,
like clenched jaws and tensed
fists and heat in the face.
The physical feelings
of these emotions
are very distinct from
the sensation of hunger
and fatigue-- two things
they're often confused with.
Hunger is a gnawing
contraction between the bottom
of your sternum and
your navel back in here.
Fatigue is first felt as an
achy feeling, which is often
found in the back of
your arms and your neck
and your mid-back.
Secondary sensations
of fatigue--
are mental fog, a
downward heaviness
or pulling in the
legs, and the heavy
eyelids that you feel often
before you go to sleep.
To illustrate my
next point, I'd like
to tell you more
about that moment when
I was walking in the
woods that day and slipped
and fell and was
lying on my back.
I saw all of these defenses I
had erected, all of the ways
I attacked myself just
for having feelings.
I also saw clearly
how all of these
denied emotions caused
me to project things
about other people that
were really about me, not
about them.
For example, because
I denied my anger,
I saw other people as angry.
In that moment of
clear insight, I
realized that I held my
muscles in chronic contraction
to keep my feelings
at bay, to keep myself
from feeling those feelings.
Somehow I got this
idea or illusion
that I wouldn't feel
sad or scared if I
kept my muscles contracted.
This exercise will
help you know how
the different emotions of
joy, fear, sadness, and anger
feel in your body.
First, let's go back
to the yes breath.
Take a few easy breaths.
Remember breathing in
for six or seven seconds,
breathing out for
six or seven seconds.
Take it very slow and easy,
and keep it connected.
Breathe easy and connected.
Breathe in and out
through your nose.
Arch your back as you breathe
in and flatten your back
as you breathe out.
When you get an easeful
flow going inside
from your breathing,
float these suggestions
through your consciousness.
So take a moment to scan
the front of your body.
Think of a moment when you
were afraid, but not terrified.
Just think of a moment when you
were anxious about something--
maybe taking a test
or something you
were scared about in your life.
Breathe and remember
that time, while you take
a couple of easy, slow breaths.
Back to checking into
fear for a moment--
scan your solar plexus
area around your navel
and your belly, while you
take two slow, easy breaths.
Now, let's shift over a little
bit to focus on sadness.
Take a breath or two--
easy, slow breathing.
Open up your chest
and heart area.
Scan that area and
notice if you feel
any of the signs of sadness,
such as a lump in the throat
or a heaviness in your chest
or a tugging at your eyelids.
Think of a time when you
felt angry about something.
Just take a few breaths
and remember that time.
As you do that,
scan your shoulders
between your shoulder blades
and up the back of your neck.
Notice what you
feel in your back.
Put your consciousness
to work for you.
Now, shift over
and think of a time
when you were really happy.
Feel what you were doing some
time when you were really
feeling good, happy, feeling
content, and fulfilled.
Breathe and remember
that time, while you take
a couple of slow, easy breaths.
Really stretch out into
that feeling of happiness.
Now, take a few breaths and
move around a little bit,
stretching and letting go of
the thoughts and feelings that
came up in this exercise.
The more you can learn
about your emotions,
the better off you are.
We all need to know what
emotional situations cause
us to go into unconscious
eating patterns.
For me, it had a lot to do with
a certain feeling of loneliness
and feeling like I was a victim.
I thought that people were
picking on me and I was lonely
and I had nobody
to connect with.
That would oftentimes drive
me to the refrigerator.
But I didn't know
that until I spent
a lot of time learning to pay
attention to my emotions again.
In our next episode,
I'm going to show you
how a certain kind of
spiritual awareness
can make it much easier to
create your healthy body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]